Union and its Territory

Article 1: Definition
	India, that is, Bharat as a ‘Union of States’ rather than a ‘Federation of States’
		India, Bharat: Name of Country
		Union of States: Polity
		Indian Federation is not the result of an agreement among the states like the American FederationStates have no right to secede from the federation

Territory of India: states but also union territories and territories that may be acquired by the Government of India at any future time
Union of India: includes only states


Article 2: Admission
	admit, establish  new states
	Admission: refers to the admission of states which are already in existence
	Establish: stablishment of states which were NOT in EXISTENCE before.

Reorganization of States
Article 3: Three:Alteration
	(a) form a new state by separation of territory from any state or by uniting two or more states or parts of states or by uniting any territory to a part of any state
	(b) increase/diminish the area of any state
	(d) alter state boundaries
	(e) alter the name of any state.

	Rules
		Prior recommendation to President before bill in parliament
		President refers to state for views
				but views of states does not matter
				the territorial integrity or continued existence of any state is not guaranteed by the Constitution


Article 4
	Admission or Establishment of new states(Article 2)
	Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states(Articles 3)
		 are not amendments of the Constitution under Article 368
	Hence, Simple majority and by the ordinary legislative process.


Nehru-Noon Agreement, 1958
Berubari Union Case
	 India secede (west Bengal) to Pakistan
	 SC said, Article 3 does not cover cession of Indian territory to a foreign country
	 Hence, Indian territory can be ceded to a foreign state only by amending the Constitution under Article 368.
	 Consequently, the 9th Constitutional Amendment Act (1960) was enacted to transfer the said territory to Pakistan.


100th Constitutional Amendment Act (2015) was enacted to give effect to the acquiring of certain territories by India and transfer of certain other territories to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered into between the Governments of India and Bangladesh


1948, the Government of India appointed the Linguistic Provinces Commission under the chairmanship of S K Dhar to examine the feasibility of this
recommended the reorganisation of states on the basis of administrative convenience rather than linguistic factor




Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallahbhai Patel and Pattabhi Sitaramayya and hence, was popularly known as JVP Committee
 formally rejected language as the basis for reorganisation of states



 October 1953, the Government of India was forced to create the first linguistic state, known as Andhra state, by separating the Telugu speaking areas from the Madras state.



 Fazl Ali Commission 1953
 	Three-member States Reorganisation Commission
 		Fazl Ali
 		K M Panikkar
 		H N KunzruB

 	Broadly accepted language as the basis of reorganisation of states
 	Rejected the theory of ‘ONE LANGUAGE– ONE STATE’

 	Four Major factors
 		(a) Preservation of Unity and Security
 		(b) Linguistic and cultural homogeneity
 		(c) Financial, Economic and administrative considerations
 		(d) Welfare of the people

 	Suggested
 	Abolition of the four-fold classification(A,B,C,D)
 	Creation of 16 states and 3 centrally administered territories

 	The Government of India accepted
 		States Reorganisation Act (1956) and the 7th Constitutional Amendment Act (1956)
 			Part-A and Part-B states was done away with and Part-C states were abolished
 			Merged with adjacent states and some other were designated as union territories
 			Result: 14 states and 6 union territories, on November 1, 1956
 			6 Uts
 				 Andaman and Nicobar Islands
 				 Delhi
 				 Himachal Pradesh
				 Laccadive Minicoy and Amindivi Islands
				 Manipur
				 Tripura

		 Madya Bharat state, Vindya Pradesh state and Bhopal state into the Madya Pradesh state
		 New Union territory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands from the territory detached from the Madras state

Order of States
	1. 15th Gujarat 16th Maharashtra 1960
	2. Dadra and Nagar Haveli
		 10th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1961
	3. Goa, Daman and Diu 1961
		Goa statehood in 1987
	4. Puducherry 1962
	5. Nagaland 1963
	6. 17th Haryana, Chandigarh and 18th Himachal Pradesh 1966
	7. Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya In 1972
	8. Sikkim
		35th amendment associate state 1974
		36th full state in 1975
	9. Mizoram 23rd
	   Arunachal Pradesh 24th
	   Goa 25th states

	10. Chhattisgarh	Uttarakhand 	Jharkhand
		26th 		    27th			28th
	11. Telangana In 2014 29th